>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, JANUARY 28: THE
IMMIGRATION BAN ORDERED BY
PRESIDENT TRUMP TAKES HOLD AS
PEOPLE FROM SELECTED COUNTRIES
ARE BLOCKED FROM ENTERING THE
UNITED STATES; AND IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE
PRESIDENT'S PROMISE TO
RENEGOTIATE NAFTA-- HOW THAT
POSSIBILITY IS BEING
RECEIVED IN TEXAS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP'S
PROMISED CRACKDOWN ON REFUGEES
AND IMMIGRANTS FROM MUSLIM
COUNTRIES HAS BEGUN.
THE EXECUTIVE ORDER PRESIDENT
TRUMP SIGNED YESTERDAY AFTERNOON
BANS ALL IMMIGRANTS AND VISA
HOLDERS FROM SEVEN MAJORITY-
MUSLIM COUNTRIES FROM ENTERING
THE UNITED STATES FOR 90 DAYS.
THOSE SEVEN COUNTRIES ARE IRAN,
IRAQ, LIBYA, SYRIA, SOMALIA,
SUDAN AND YEMEN.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY SAID TODAY CITIZENS OF
THOSE COUNTRIES WHO ARE LEGAL
PERMANENT RESIDENTS CANNOT
RETURN FROM ABROAD UNTIL THEY
ARE EVALUATED ON A CASE BY CASE
BASIS.
IMMIGRATION RIGHTS ADVOCATES ARE
ADVISING GREEN CARD HOLDERS TO
CONSULT A LAWYER BEFORE PLANNING
ANY TRIPS OUTSIDE THE U.S.
THE ORDER ALSO SUSPENDS
ADMISSION OF REFUGEES FROM WAR-
TORN NATIONS FOR 120 DAYS WHILE
THE ADMINISTRATION REEVALUATES
THE VETTING PROCESS.
THE U.S. ADMITTED 85,000
REFUGEES LAST YEAR, INCLUDING
12,500 SYRIANS.
MOST SYRIAN REFUGEES ARE IN
TURKEY, JORDAN AND LEBANON, AND
TODAY SOME REFUGEES SAID THEY'RE
DISAPPOINTED BY THE NEW POLICY.
>> (translated): IT WAS MY
HOPE TO IMMIGRATE TO AMERICA.
BUT WHEN WE HEARD THE ORDER, IT
WAS LIKE A LIGHTENING BOLT, AND
ALL OF OUR HOPES AND DREAMS
VANISHED.
>> (translated): IT IS UNFAIR
AND HUMILIATING NOT ONLY TO THE
SYRIANS, BUT ALL ARABS.
>> Stewart: THE TEMPORARY BAN ON
REFUGEE ADMISSIONS HAS AN
EXCEPTION FOR PEOPLE CLAIMING
RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION.
IN AN INTERVIEW TO BE BROADCAST
IN FULL TOMORROW, MR. TRUMP TOLD
CHRISTIAN BROADCASTING NETWORK
THAT EXCEPTIONS WOULD APPLY TO
CHRISTIANS IN PREDOMINANTLY
MUSLIM COUNTRIES.
>> THEY'VE BEEN HORRIBLY
TREATED.
DO YOU KNOW, IF YOU WERE A
CHRISTIAN IN SYRIA, IT WAS
IMPOSSIBLE, AT LEAST VERY TOUGH,
TO GET INTO THE UNITED STATES?
IF YOU WERE A MUSLIM, YOU COULD
COME IN.
AND I THOUGHT IT WAS VERY, VERY
UNFAIR, SO WE ARE GOING TO HELP
THEM.
>> Stewart: ONE COUNTRY SINGLED
OUT BY THE ORDER, IRAN,
RETALIATED TODAY WITH ITS OWN
BAN ON AMERICANS VISITING IRAN,
INCLUDING ONE MILLION IRANIAN-
AMERICANS WITH RELATIVES THERE.
THE FOREIGN MINISTRY SAID IN A
STATEMENT: "IRAN WILL IMPLEMENT
THE PRINCIPLE OF RECIPROCITY
UNTIL THE OFFENSIVE U.S.
LIMITATIONS AGAINST IRANIAN
NATIONALS ARE LIFTED.
THE RESTRICTIONS AGAINST TRAVEL
BY MUSLIMS TO AMERICA ARE AN
OPEN AFFRONT AGAINST THE MUSLIM
WORLD AND THE IRANIAN NATION IN
PARTICULAR AND WILL BE KNOWN AS
A GREAT GIFT TO EXTREMISTS."
THE AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION AND THE COUNCIL ON
AMERICAN-ISLAMIC RELATIONS SAID
TODAY THEY PLAN ON CHALLENGING
THE EXECUTIVE ORDER IN COURT AS
DISCRIMINATORY AND VIOLATING THE
CONSTITUTION'S RIGHT TO FREEDOM
OF RELIGION.
CONGRESSIONAL DEMOCRATS ARE
CRITICAL OF THE ORDER.
HOUSE DEMOCRATIC LEADER NANCY
PELOSI SAYS: "AS THE STATUE OF
LIBERTY HOLDS HER TORCH OF
WELCOME HIGH, THERE ARE TEARS IN
HER EYES."
BUT MR. TRUMP IS RECEIVING
SUPPORT IN HIS OWN PARTY.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SPEAKER
PAUL RYAN SAYS: "I SUPPORT THE
REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT PROGRAM,
BUT IT'S TIME TO REEVALUATE AND
STRENGTHEN THE VISA VETTING
PROCESS.
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS RIGHT TO MAKE
SURE WE ARE DOING EVERYTHING
POSSIBLE TO KNOW EXACTLY WHO IS
ENTERING OUR COUNTRY."
THE ORDER IS CREATING CONFUSION
AT AIRPORTS ACROSS THE U.S. AND
AROUND THE WORLD, WITH REPORTS
OF TRAVELERS-- SOME WHO LEFT
BEFORE THE BAN WAS IN PLACE--
BEING DETAINED.
HERE IN NEW YORK, 12 TRAVELERS
WERE DETAINED TODAY AT J.F.K.
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT.
ONE MAN FROM IRAQ, HAMEED
DARWEESH, RELEASED EARLIER THIS
AFTERNOON AFTER A LAWYER
INTERVENED, HAD A SPECIAL
IMMIGRANT VISA FOR U.S. MILITARY
TRANSLATORS.
HE IS JOINING HIS FAMILY ALREADY
IN THE U.S.
THE EXECUTIVE ORDER DOES NOT
RESTRICT IMMIGRATION FROM ANY OF
THE TOP TEN COUNTRIES LISTED BY
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES'
HOMELAND SECURITY COMMITTEE IN
2015 AS SUPPLIERS OF MILITANTS
FIGHTING FOR ISIS, NOR DOES IT
RESTRICT TRAVEL FROM COUNTRIES
THAT HAVE BEEN PRIMARY SOURCES
FOR AL QAEDA OPERATIVES, LIKE
PAKISTAN AND SAUDI ARABIA, WHICH
WAS HOME TO 15 OF THE 19 9/11
HIJACKERS.
"NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER
NICHOLAS KULISH IS COVERING THIS
STORY AND JOINS ME FROM J.F.K.
AIRPORT, WHERE HE'S BEEN SINCE
2:00 A.M., TO TALK ABOUT IT AND
THE WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE
NEW TRUMP POLICY.
NICK, CAN YOU GIVE US A LITTLE
MORE INFORMATION ABOUT MR.
DARWEESH?
>> SURE, HE WORKED FOR ABOUT TEN
YEARS FOR THE UNITED STATES
ARMY, AND THE UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT IN IRAQ.
HE THOUGHT THAT HE WAS COMING
HERE FOR, YOU KNOW, AN EASY TRIP
WITH HIS VISA TO GET INTO THIS
COUNTRY WITH HIS WIFE AND HIS
THREE CHILDREN.
INSTEAD, HE WATCHED HIS FAMILY
ENTER THE UNITED STATES WHILE HE
REMAINED DETAINED OVERNIGHT HERE
AT THE J.F.K. AIRPORT.
>> Stewart: AND WE SHOULD
POINT OUT, THERE'S BEEN A
PROTEST GOING ON.
THAT'S WHAT'S HAPPENING BEHIND
YOU, RIGHT?
>> THERE'S A PRETTY SIZABLE
PROTEST GOING ON BEHIND ME.
IT'S-- YOU KNOW, IT'S FUNNY.
IT WAS COMPLETELY EMPTY AND
SILENT, JUST A COUPLE OF LAWYERS
WORKING ON BRIEFS AND MOTIONS
HERE OVERNIGHT.
AND NOW, YOU CAN HEAR BEHIND ME
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE PROTESTING IN
FAVOR OF IMMIGRANTS.
>> Stewart: AND IN TERMS OF
THE LEGAL ASPECT OF THIS, WHAT
HAPPENS GOING FORWARD FOR
MR. DARWEESH, AND THERE IS
ANOTHER IRAQI MAN THERE, TOO,
WHO HAS BEEN DETAINED.
>> YES, THERE IS ANOTHER IRAQI
NATIONAL HERO WHO IS HOPING TO
JOIN HIS WIFE AND CHILD IN
TEXAS, BUT HE REMAINS IN
DETENTION, AS DO AT LEAST
ANOTHER TEN PEOPLE.
BUT NO ONE REALLY KNOWS FOR SURE
HOW MANY WOULD-BE IMMIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES ARE SPREAD THROUGHOUT
J.F.K. AIRPORT'S VARIOUS
TERMINALS.
>> Stewart: IT SEEMS LIKE IT'S
BEEN A VERY CONFUSING DAY AT
AIRPORTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
HAVE YOU SPOKEN TO ANYONE AT
T.S.A. OR HOMELAND SECURITY OR
ANY OFFICIALS, WHO HAVE TOLD YOU
ABOUT WHAT THEY KNOW AND WHAT
THE PROCESS IS GOING TO BE?
>> IT FEELS AS THOUGH THERE
ALMOST ISN'T A PROCESS, AS
THOUGH THE INDIVIDUAL PEOPLE
TRYING TO PROCESS AND DEAL WITH
THE EXECUTIVE ORDERS AREN'T SURE
EXACTLY HOW TO INTERPRET THEM.
SOME PEOPLE THINK THAT IT
APPLIES TO GREEN CARD HOLDERS.
OTHER PEOPLE THINK THAT IT ONLY
APPLIES TO REFUGEES.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF-- A LOT OF
CHAOS, A LOT OF UNCERTAINTY,
AND I THINK THAT THAT LEADS TO
LONGER DETENTION TIMES, EVEN FOR
PEOPLE WHO-- WHO PROBABLY HAVE A
RIGHT TO BE IN THE COUNTRY.
>> Stewart: THERE HAVE BEEN
REPORTS OF AMERICAN BUSINESSES
CALLING PEOPLE BACK.
GOOGLE, ONE REPORT SAYS, HAS
ABOUT 100 PEOPLE WHO ARE
TRAVELING ABROAD WHO MIGHT BE
AFFECTED BY THIS ORDER.
WHAT OTHER INSTITUTIONS ARE
HAVING ISSUES, POTENTIAL ISSUES?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY, WE'VE HEARD
THAT EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
ARE HAVING A SERIOUS PROBLEM
WITH UNDERGRADUATES, GRADUATE
STUDENTS, EVEN FACULTY MEMBERS
WHO ARE UNABLE TO COME BACK
AFTER THE WINTER BREAK.
AND, YOU KNOW, BUT I THINK THE
BIGGEST ISSUE ARE REALLY FOR
FAMILIES, FOR PEOPLE WHO, MAYBE
IN IRAQ SOLD THEIR HOMES, SOLD
THEIR CARS, AND ARE NOW TRAPPED
EITHER HERE OR IN A THIRD
COUNTRY WITH NO CERTAINTY AS TO
WHERE THEY'LL END UP.
>> Stewart: NICK KULISH FROM
THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR TAKING THE
TIME TO JOIN US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Stewart: READ ABOUT THE
EXECUTIVE ACTIONS PRESIDENT
TRUMP HAS SIGNED SO FAR.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
PRESIDENT TRUMP ANNOUNCED THIS
WEEK HE'LL RENEGOTIATE NAFTA,
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE
AGREEMENT WITH CANADA AND
MEXICO, IMPLEMENTED IN THE
1990s.
MR. TRUMP AND OTHER NAFTA
CRITICS BLAME IT FOR THE CLOSURE
OF AMERICAN FACTORIES AND LOSS
OF MANUFACTURING JOBS, MOSTLY
MOVING TO MEXICO, WHERE LABOR
COSTS ARE CHEAPER.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE LOOK AT THE VIEWS OF NAFTA IN
TEXAS, WHICH SHARES A BORDER
WITH MEXICO AND WHERE MR. TRUMP
BEAT HILLARY CLINTON BY 9% OF
THE VOTE.
BUT AS SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
LISA DESAI REPORTS, MANY
BUSINESS OWNERS AND POLITICIANS
THERE FAVOR THE FREE TRADE DEAL.
>> Reporter: AT PRECISION MOLD
AND TOOL, THIS IS BUSINESS AS
USUAL.
THIS COMPANY IN SAN ANTONIO,
TEXAS, CREATES PLASTIC PARTS AND
MOLDS FOR INDUSTRIES IN THE
UNITED STATES AND AROUND THE
WORLD.
DOMINGO AUCES IS THE VICE
PRESIDENT OF OPERATIONS.
>> YOU KNOW, PARTS LIKE THAT YOU
DON'T NOTICE AND USE EVERY DAY,
LIKE THE REMOTE CONTROL THAT YOU
USE FOR YOUR TV, THE BUTTONS ON
YOUR LAPTOP, THE BUTTONS ON YOUR
SHIRT.
>> Reporter: WITH SALES TOPPING
$12 MILLION LAST YEAR, PRECISION
MOLD AND TOOL IS ONE OF MANY
SMALL BUSINESSES THAT MAKE TEXAS
THE NUMBER ONE STATE FOR FOREIGN
EXPORTS.
THE LONE STAR STATE DEPENDS
HEAVILY ON THE NORTH AMERICAN
FREE TRADE AGREEMENT, OR NAFTA,
SIGNED IN SAN ANTONIO BY
PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON IN 1993.
THE AGREEMENT ALLOWS GOODS AND
SERVICES TO MOVE MORE FREELY,
WITHOUT TARIFFS, ACROSS THE
BORDERS OF THE U.S., CANADA AND
MEXICO.
THE BENEFITS PROMISED TO
AMERICANS WERE ECONOMIC GROWTH,
ACCESS TO CHEAPER PRODUCTS AND
MORE AMERICAN JOBS.
ACCORDING TO THE CENSUS BUREAU,
SINCE NAFTA TOOK EFFECT, U.S.
TRADE WITH CANADA AND MEXICO HAS
GROWN STEADILY AND TRIPLED BY
2015 TO $1 TRILLION A YEAR.
AND A 2014 STUDY BY THE U.S.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE SHOWS THAT
NEARLY FIVE MILLION AMERICAN
JOBS, INCLUDING 350,000 IN
TEXAS, ARE SUPPORTED BY
INCREASED TRADE FROM NAFTA.
AUCES' COMPANY IS AMONG THOSE
THAT REAPED THESE BENEFITS.
IT STARTED IN 1985 WITH JUST TWO
WORKERS IN A GARAGE.
TODAY, MORE THAN 60 WORKERS ARE
EMPLOYED AT THREE FACTORIES, TWO
IN TEXAS AND ONE IN MEXICO.
>> THE WHOLE NAFTA, YOU KNOW,
THE WAY IT'S SET UP, IT ALLOWS
US TO HAVE THAT FREE FLOW AND
JUST TO ENTER AND LEAVE THE
COUNTRY WITH A LOT OF EASE.
>> Reporter: REYNOSA, MEXICO,
HAS ATTRACTED COMPANIES FROM THE
U.S. AND AROUND THE WORLD,
TAKING ADVANTAGE OF LOWER LABOR
COSTS.
IT'S BECOME A BOOMING
MANUFACTURING HUB, PRODUCING
EVERYTHING FROM CARS TO
ELECTRONICS.
THIS GROWTH HAS ALLOWED AUCES TO
EXPAND HIS BUSINESS BY SELLING
MOLDS DIRECTLY TO THE FLOCK OF
NEW COMPANIES BASED ON THE
MEXICAN SIDE OF THE BORDER.
WHAT'S THE BENEFIT OF HAVING A
PRESENCE IN MEXICO?
>> YOU CAN FIND OTHER COMPANIES
THAT DO WHAT WE DO OR SIMILAR
SERVICES, BUT THEY MIGHT BE
LOCATED ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
COUNTRY.
WE ARE LOCATED RIGHT NEXT TO THE
MAJORITY OF OUR CLIENTS.
>> Reporter: WITHOUT NAFTA,
WOULD YOUR BUSINESS BE ABLE TO
STAY COMPETITIVE?
>> I DON'T THINK WE WOULD HAVE
BEEN AS SUCCESSFUL AS WE HAVE
BEEN.
>> Reporter: 150 MILES FROM SAN
ANTONIO, LAREDO, TEXAS, IS THE
BORDER TOWN AT THE EPICENTER OF
THIS GROWTH.
IT'S HOME TO THE WORLD TRADE
BRIDGE, WHICH 14,000 TRUCKS
CROSS EVERY DAY FROM BOTH SIDES
OF THE BORDER.
THEY CARRIED OVER $160 BILLION
WORTH OF GOODS LAST YEAR,
ACCORDING TO THE TEXAS CENTER ON
BORDER AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AT TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY.
THAT'S NEARLY A THIRD OF ALL
TRADE BETWEEN THE U.S. AND
MEXICO.
I.B.C. BANK, HEADQUARTERED IN
LAREDO, FINANCES REAL ESTATE
DEALS BOOSTED BY FREE TRADE,
LIKE THESE WAREHOUSES THAT
DISTRIBUTE GOODS THAT TRAVEL
ACROSS THE BORDER.
DENNIS NIXON IS THE BANK'S
C.E.O.
>> LAREDO WAS PRETTY MUCH A
SMALL TOWN, AND THEN, WHEN NAFTA
CAME TO PASS, THAT JUST SORT OF
EXPLODED.
>> Reporter: NIXON SAYS THE
STATE'S ECONOMIC GROWTH COULD
COME TO A STANDSTILL IF THE U.S.
WERE TO SIGNIFICANTLY ROLLBACK
NAFTA.
>> THE PEOPLE WHO SAY WE SHOULD
STOP THESE TRADE AGREEMENTS,
THAT WOULD BE THE BEGINNING OF
THE END FOR US.
AND WE'LL PUSH.
TEXAS CANNOT SURVIVE WITHOUT
MEXICO; IT'S OUR LARGEST TRADING
PARTNER.
IT WOULD PUT TEXAS IN A
RECESSION, IMMEDIATELY, AND IT
WOULD FRANKLY DESTROY LAREDO,
TEXAS.
WE WOULD NOT EXIST WITHOUT
TRADE.
>> Reporter: WITH VIEWS LIKE
THAT, IT MIGHT SURPRISE YOU TO
LEARN THAT NIXON WAS THE TEXAS
FINANCE CHAIRMAN FOR THE TRUMP
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN.
>> NAFTA HAS BEEN A TERRIBLE
DEAL, A TOTAL DISASTER FOR THE
UNITED STATES FROM ITS
INCEPTION.
>> Reporter: NIXON HAS TRIED TO
TELL MR. TRUMP, IN HIS OPINION,
WHY ROLLING BACK NAFTA COULD DO
MORE HARM THAN GOOD.
>> MY MESSAGE TO THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION IS... I'VE BEEN
SAYING ALL ALONG IS, REACH OUT
TO PEOPLE WHO REALLY LIVE AND
UNDERSTAND THE COMPLICATIONS OF
TRADE AND HOW THEY AFFECT THE
LIVES OF EVERYDAY AMERICANS AND
WHAT IT DOES TO OUR NATION AND
OUR ECONOMY.
THIS HAS TO HAVE A HOLISTIC
PROCESS TO IT, THE OLD STORY "IF
IT AIN'T BROKE, DON'T FIX IT."
MANY PEOPLE WOULD ARGUE THAT
THIS TRADE AGREEMENT IS NOT
BROKEN.
I'M ONE OF THOSE.
>> Reporter: CONGRESSMAN WILL
HURD'S DISTRICT, STRETCHING FROM
SAN ANTONIO TO EL PASO, COVERS
820 MILES OF THE U.S./MEXICO
BORDER, MORE THAN ANY OTHER
DISTRICT IN THE NATION.
HURD IS A REPUBLICAN WHO
SUPPORTED TRUMP, BUT HE'S
CONCERNED ABOUT HOW THE
PRESIDENT MAY ROLL BACK NAFTA OR
IMPOSE AN IMPORT TAX ON
COMPANIES THAT MANUFACTURE
PRODUCTS IN MEXICO AND SELL THEM
IN THE U.S.
THAT COULD AFFECT ONE OF THE
BIGGEST EMPLOYERS IN HIS
DISTRICT, TOYOTA, WHICH HAS MORE
THAN 3,000 WORKERS IN SAN
ANTONIO CHURNING OUT PICKUP
TRUCKS WITH SOME PARTS MADE IN
MEXICO.
>> THERE IS UNCERTAINTY, AND
UNCERTAINTY IN THE BUSINESS
WORLD IS NOT SOMETHING THAT YOU
WANT.
BUT I THINK PEOPLE ARE ALSO...
THEY RECOGNIZE THE OPPORTUNITIES
THAT WE HAVE, AND I THINK PEOPLE
ARE READY TO START HAVING
NEGOTIATIONS ON "WHAT DOES A
FUTURE NAFTA LOOK LIKE?"
>> Reporter: CONGRESSMAN HURD
HAS HIS OWN IDEAS FOR MODIFYING
NAFTA, BY MAKING BORDER
CROSSINGS MORE EFFICIENT AND
SIMPLIFYING THE CUSTOMS PROCESS,
LOWERING BARRIERS TO U.S.
AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS AND
DECREASING REGULATION IN THE OIL
AND NATURAL GAS TRADE.
>> IF WE'RE ABLE TO UPGRADE
NAFTA AND IMPROVE THE EXPORT
MARKETS FOR AMERICAN BUSINESSES,
THAT HELPS EVERYBODY.
THAT PUTS MORE PEOPLE TO WORK,
THAT INCREASES WAGES, THAT HELPS
PEOPLE MOVE UP THE ECONOMIC
LADDER.
SO, A PROPER NEGOTIATION
ACHIEVEMENT, ACHIEVING A NAFTA
2.0, IT'S GOING TO BE GREAT FOR
AMERICAN BUSINESSES.
>> Reporter: BOB CASH DIDN'T
SUPPORT PRESIDENT TRUMP BUT
AGREES THAT NAFTA NEEDS TO BE
RENEGOTIATED.
CASH HEADS THE TEXAS FAIR TRADE
COALITION, AN ADVOCACY GROUP FOR
WORKERS RIGHTS AND FAIR TRADE
DEALS.
>> TRADE AGREEMENTS AND THE WAY
THEY'VE ALWAYS BEEN SOLD TO US
IS THAT IT'S GOING TO BE A WIN-
WIN SITUATION.
AND THE FACT IS THAT THEY HAVE
TURNED... THEY ARE WIN-WIN
AGREEMENTS, BUT THEY PRETTY MUCH
WIN-WIN FOR THE ECONOMIC ELITE,
AND WORKING CLASS FOLKS HAVE
REALLY GOT THE SHORT END.
>> Reporter: CASH SAYS NAFTA
NEEDS NEW RULES FOR FAIRER WAGES
AND BETTER LABOR STANDARDS TO
MAKE SURE THAT AMERICAN WORKERS
AREN'T LEFT BEHIND.
>> ONLY A TRADE DEAL THAT'S
REALLY BASED ON INCREASING
LIVING STANDARDS, NOT PROFITS
NECESSARILY, OR SUPER PROFITS OF
CORPORATIONS, BUT BASED ON
INCREASING LIVING STANDARDS IN
ALL THREE COUNTRIES, HAS REALLY
THE CHANCE OF DELIVERING THE
PROMISES THAT NAFTA MADE AND
NEVER DELIVERED.
>> Reporter: CESAR MENDEZ IS A
CASUALTY OF NAFTA.
HE WAS ONE OF 500 EMPLOYEES WHO
LOST THEIR JOBS AT A WHEEL
MANUFACTURING PLANT IN ARKANSAS
WHEN THE COMPANY MOVED ITS
OPERATION TO CHIHUAHUA, MEXICO,
IN 2014.
>> I MEAN, YOU'RE LOSING YOUR
JOB.
I WAS WITH THE COMPANY FOR ABOUT
SEVEN TO EIGHT YEARS.
I HAD SETTLED MYSELF DOWN WITH
THE COMPANY, WITH THE JOB I HAD,
SO I FELT TERRIBLE.
>> Reporter: MENDEZ MOVED TO SAN
ANTONIO IN SEARCH OF NEW WORK
AND TO UPGRADE HIS SKILLS.
HIS CLASSES ARE PAID FOR BY THE
TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM, A U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
LABOR PROGRAM THAT GIVES
BENEFITS TO AMERICANS WHO'VE
LOST THEIR JOBS BECAUSE OF FREE
TRADE DEALS.
MORE THAN 700,000 QUALIFIED
BECAUSE OF NAFTA.
>> ONCE I DID MY RESEARCH, I SAW
THAT SAN ANTONIO IS REALLY BIG
IN MANUFACTURING, AND I WOULD
HAVE A BETTER CHANCE ONCE I
GRADUATE, FINDING SOMETHING IN
MY FIELD AND MY DEGREE.
>> Reporter: AUTOMATION IS
ANOTHER FACTOR CAUSING THE
DECLINE IN THE NUMBER OF
MANUFACTURING JOBS.
PRECISION MOLD AND TOOL IS
INCREASINGLY RELIANT ON MACHINES
THAT CAN RUN AROUND THE CLOCK,
INSTEAD OF SHIFT WORKERS.
>> MOST PEOPLE, THEIR BIGGEST
COMPLAINT ABOUT NAFTA IS THAT,
"WELL, WITH NAFTA, THERE WENT
OUR JOBS."
AND THE WAY WE'VE ALWAYS LOOKED
AT IT IS THAT, YOU KNOW, WE LOOK
AHEAD.
YOU KNOW, THERE ARE SOME JOBS
THAT, OVER TIME, THEY ARE GOING
TO GO AWAY.
>> Reporter: SO, HOW HAS
AUTOMATION REALLY CHANGED YOUR
OPERATION?
>> OH, IT'S REALLY
REVOLUTIONIZED JUST THE EASE OF
HOW WE DO OUR DAILY OPERATIONS.
NOW, WE HAVE ONE PERSON THAT'S
RUNNING MULTIPLE MACHINES, AND
THEN HE'S ABLE TO WALK AWAY FROM
IT WITHOUT ANY INTERRUPTION TO
THE MACHINE, BECAUSE BEFORE,
ONCE THAT PERSON NEEDED TO GO
TAKE A LUNCH BREAK OR MAYBE HAD
TO TEND TO SOMETHING ELSE, THAT
WHOLE PROCESS STOPPED.
>> Reporter: WITH THE START OF
NAFTA'S RENEGOTIATION IMMINENT,
TEXAS BUSINESS LEADERS LIKE
BANKER DENNIS NIXON HOPE THE
WHITE HOUSE HEARS THEIR MESSAGE.
ARE YOU WORRIED ABOUT THE FUTURE
OF NAFTA?
>> I MEAN, MAYBE "WORRIED" IS
A-- TOO BIG OF A WORD.
I THINK THAT THE PURE REALITY OF
NAFTA IS GOING TO SHOW THE
BENEFITS OF NAFTA, AND THE
CONSEQUENCES OF DISMANTLING
NAFTA WOULD BE CATASTROPHIC TO
ALL THREE COUNTRIES.
SO, THIS THING HAS SUCH A
MASSIVELY INTERCONNECTED,
DAMAGING PROCESS IF WE TRY TO
TAKE IT APART.
IT'S ALMOST LIKE HUMPTY DUMPTY,
YOU KNOW; WE CAN'T PUT IT BACK
TOGETHER AGAIN.
>> Stewart: TWO ANNOUNCEMENTS BY
PRESIDENT TRUMP PUT HIM AT ODDS
WITH LEADERS IN THE NATION'S
THIRD MOST POPULOUS CITY,
CHICAGO.
FIRST, MR. TRUMP WROTE ON
TWITTER, IF CHICAGO LEADERS
CAN'T REDUCE THE VIOLENCE IN THE
CITY, HE'D "SEND IN THE FEDS."
THERE WERE 4,000 SHOOTINGS AND
NEARLY 800 GUN HOMICIDES THERE
LAST YEAR.
THEN, HE SIGNED AN EXECUTIVE
ORDER WITHHOLDING FEDERAL GRANT
MONEY FROM SO-CALLED "SANCTUARY
CITIES" LIKE CHICAGO THAT LIMIT
COOPERATION WITH FEDERAL
AUTHORITIES ON DETAINING
IMMIGRANTS.
TO DISCUSS BOTH OF THESE ISSUES,
I AM JOINED FROM CHICAGO BY "USA
TODAY" REPORTER AAMER MADHANI.
AAMER, TO DESCRIBE WHAT WAS
GOING ON IN CHICAGO, PRESIDENT
TRUMP USED THE WORD "CARNAGE,"
WHICH QUITE LITERALLY MEANS,
LARGE-SCALE KILLING OF PEOPLE.
SO IN THIS INSTANCE IT MIGHT
ACTUALLY BE THE ACCURATE WORD TO
USE.
WHAT IS UNIQUE ABOUT CHICAGO
THAT WE'RE HAVING THESE KIND OF
NUMBERS?
>> WELL, WHAT'S UNIQUE ABOUT
CHICAGO IS THAT I THINK SORT OF
SOME OF THE STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS
THAT WE SAW IN THE '90s AND
LATE '80s, IN THE MIDST OF THE
CRACK COCAINE EPIDEMIC, A LOT OF
THE STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS THAT
CAUSED THOSE SPIKES IN VIOLENCE
THAT HAVE GONE DOWN ELSEWHERE IN
BIG CITIES LIKE NEW YORK AND
L.A., THEY HAVEN'T TOTALLY BEEN
ADDRESSED HERE.
>> Stewart: NOBODY IS REALLY
DISPUTING THAT IT'S A HORRIBLE
SITUATION.
THE THING THAT UPSET PEOPLE WAS
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S POTENTIAL
SOLUTION.
>> IT'S REALLY VAGUE, YOU KNOW,
HE SAYS, "I'M GOING TO SEND THE
FEDS IN."
DOES THAT MEAN I'M GOING TO
ORDER NATIONAL GUARD TROOPS IN
THE STREETS?
DOES THAT MEAN I'M GOING TO RUSH
A BUNCH OF FEDERAL MONEY TO YOUR
CITY?
DOES IT MEAN SOMETHING ELSE?
SO THERE'S A LITTLE BIT
BEWILDERMENT AND CONFUSION.
>> Stewart: THE MURDER RATE
NOW IS NOT AS HIGH AS IT WAS IN
THE '90s, BUT THERE WAS A DIP,
SORT OF AROUND 2005-ISH TO 2013,
WHERE IT WENT DOWN QUITE A BIT.
WHAT WAS GOING ON THERE, AND CAN
IT BE REPLICATED?
>> I THINK THE DIP REPLICATED
WHAT YOU SAW IN A LOT OF CITIES.
THERE'S A DYNAMIC IN CHICAGO
WITH A DEMOLITION OF HOUSING
PROJECTS AND HOW THAT HAS SORT
OF DISJOINTED GANGS IN THE CITY,
AND IT'S BEEN MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT TO GET A HANDLE ON.
THE OTHER ASPECT IN CHICAGO AS
WELL HAS BEEN THE RELEASE OF THE
LAQUAN McDONALD VIDEOS.
THERE'S ALWAYS BEEN TENSION IN
THE AFRICAN AMERICAN COMMUNITY
AND THE POLICE, BUT THAT TENSION
WAS EXACERBATED AFTER THAT.
THE OTHER ASPECT THAT
POLITICIANS HERE WOULD ALSO TALK
ABOUT IS THAT THE GUN LAWS, THEY
FEEL, ARE WEAK.
>> Stewart: LET ME TALK TO YOU
ABOUT SANCTUARY CITIES.
MAYOR RAHM EMANUEL SAID, NOPE,
CHICAGO, WE'RE GOING TO STAY A
SANCTUARY CITY, REJECTING
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S STANCE.
WAS THAT WISE, GIVEN THE
FINANCIAL PREDICAMENT CHICAGO IS
IN RIGHT NOW?
>> BASICALLY, EVERYONE, EXCEPT
IN MIAMI, EVERY BIG CITY, A
MAYOR, COUNTY OFFICIAL, HAS MORE
OR LESS TAKEN THE EMANUEL
POSITION.
THEY THINK THIS IS A COURT
FIGHT.
YOU KNOW, THEY THINK THIS IS A
STARTING POINT.
AND, ALSO, I THINK THERE'S THIS
ELEMENT THAT THIS CAN'T BE DONE
WITHOUT CONGRESS GOING ALONG
WITH IT.
AND YOU MIGHT BE A REPUBLICAN
CONGRESSMAN, BUT ARE YOU GOING
TO STRIP FEDERAL FUNDING FROM
YOUR BIG CITY IN YOUR STATE?
>> Stewart: AAMER MADHANI,
FROM "USA TODAY," FROM CHICAGO,
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: A DAY AFTER MEETING
WITH PRESIDENT TRUMP IN
WASHINGTON, BRITISH PRIME
MINISTER THERESA MAY WAS IN
TURKEY TODAY FOR TALKS WITH
PRESIDENT RECEP ERDOGAN.
THEY REPORTEDLY DISCUSSED
ECONOMIC AND SECURITY ISSUES,
AND THEN BRITAIN AND TURKEY
ANNOUNCED THEY WOULD SIGN A
BILATERAL FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
AFTER BRITAIN LEAVES THE
EUROPEAN UNION.
MAY ALSO ANNOUNCED A DEAL FOR
BRITAIN TO HELP DEVELOP A NEW
TURKISH FIGHTER JET.
THE PRIME MINISTER ALSO URGED
THE TURKISH PRESIDENT TO UPHOLD
HUMAN RIGHTS AND MAINTAIN THE
RULE OF LAW, REFERRING TO
ERDOGAN'S MASS PURGES AND
JAILINGS FOLLOWING LAST JULY'S
FAILED MILITARY COUP.
THE CHINESE LUNAR NEW YEAR
ARRIVED TODAY.
HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF CHINESE
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE HOLIDAY TO
TRAVEL BY TRAIN TO VISIT FAR-
AWAY FAMILY MEMBERS.
IN BEIJING, MANY CHINESE IGNORED
GOVERNMENT WARNINGS AND SET OFF
DISPLAYS OF FIREWORKS TO
CELEBRATE THE YEAR OF THE
ROOSTER DESPITE THE DANGEROUS
SMOG IN THAT CITY.
BEIJING OFFICIALS SAID THE AIR
POLLUTION LEVEL WAS THE SECOND-
HIGHEST IN FIVE YEARS.
AMERICAN TENNIS STAR SERENA
WILLIAMS HAS DONE IT AGAIN.
IN MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA, TODAY,
WILLIAMS WON THE WOMEN'S SINGLES
TENNIS TITLE FOR HER 23rd GRAND
SLAM TITLE, PASSING STEFFI GRAF
FOR MOST MAJOR TITLES IN THE
OPEN ERA OF PROFESSIONAL TENNIS.
35-YEAR-OLD SERENA DEFEATED HER
OLDER SISTER VENUS 6-4, 6-4 IN
THE NINTH ALL-WILLIAMS MAJOR
TITLE MATCH.
WITH THE WIN, SERENA WILLIAMS
REGAINS HER WORLD NUMBER ONE
RANKING.
AFTER A LONG CAREER IN FILMS AND
TELEVISION, VETERAN BRITISH
ACTOR SIR JOHN HURT HAS DIED OF
PANCREATIC CANCER.
HURT WAS NOMINATED FOR AN
ACADEMY AWARD FOR HIS STARRING
ROLE IN THE 1980 MOVIE, "THE
ELEPHANT MAN."
HE WAS ALSO WELL-KNOWN FOR HIS
ROLE AS KANE IN THE SCI-FI
THRILLER "ALIEN" AND MORE
RECENTLY HE APPEARED IN THE
"HARRY POTTER" FILMS AND ONE OF
THIS YEAR'S OSCAR CONTENDERS,
"JACKIE."
ON TELEVISION, HURT PLAYED
"CALIGULA" IN THE POPULAR 1970s
PBS SERIES "I, CLAUDIUS."
SIR JOHN HURT, WHO WAS KNIGHTED
IN 2015, WAS 77 YEARS OLD.
>> Stewart: PRESIDENT TRUMP
HAS SIGNED THREE MORE EXECUTIVE
ORDERS, ONE ASKS THE PENTAGON
FOR A NEW PLAN WITHIN 30 DAYS TO
DEFEAT ISIS.
A SECOND, REORGANIZES THE WHITE
HOUSE-RUN NATIONAL SECURITY
COUNCIL.
AND THE THIRD BANS
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS FROM
LOBBYING FOR FIVE YEARS AND
LOBBYING FOR FOREIGN COUNTRIES
PERMANENTLY.
THE PRESIDENT ALSO TALKED BY
PHONE TODAY WITH FIVE WORLD
LEADERS, INCLUDING RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN, FOR
THE FIRST TIME SINCE TAKING
OFFICE.
THE KREMLIN SAID THE LEADERS
TALKED ABOUT COOPERATING IN
SYRIA TO DEFEAT ISIS THERE.
IN THE CALL WITH FRENCH
PRESIDENT FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, HE
SAID HE TOLD MR. TRUMP, WHO HAS
BEEN CRITICAL OF NATO, THE
ALLIANCE IS "INDISPENSABLE."
AND FINALLY TONIGHT, IF YOU ARE
AFFECTED BY THE NEW IMMIGRATION
ORDER, TELL US YOUR STORY.
>> Stewart: THAT'S ALL FOR THIS
EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.